                                Shell commands

1.  pwd (print working directory) - command writes the full pathname of the current working directory to the standard output.
2.  ls (list segments) - lists the files in the current working directory.
        -all or -a  - (ls -a, ls -all) command will enlist the whole list of the current directory including the hidden files. Hidden files start with . (dot) symbol and they are not visible in the regular directory. 
3.  cd (change directory) - command is used to change the current working directory ( i.e., in which the current user is working). 
        Every directory contains a pointer to itself (.) and a pointer to its parent directory (..) We can navigate to the parent directory using the cd .. command. Or we can run the program from the current directory using the ./a.out command.
4.  mv (move) - command moves one or more files or directories from one place to another. 
5.  rm (remove)- command used to remove objects such as computer files, directories...
6.  which - command used to identify the location of executables. 
7.  sudo (superuser do) - allows users to run programs with the security privileges of another user, by default the superuser.
8.  sudo apt-get install [program_name] - command is used to download the latest version of your desired application from an online software repository.
9.  diff (difference) - the utility diff is a data comparison tool that computes and displays the differences between the contents of files.
        diff a.txt b.txt - shows a and b files differences in the terminal.
        diff a.txt b.txt > c.txt - creates c.txt file and writes a and b files differences in this file.
10. grep (global regular expression print) - is a command-line utility for searching plain-text data sets for lines that match a regular expression.
11. | (pipe) - A pipe is a form of redirection (transfer of standard output to some other destination) that is used to send the output of one command/program/process to another command/program/process for further processing.
12. ifconfig (interface configuration) - command is used to configure the kernel-resident network interfaces. It is used at the boot time to set up the interfaces as necessary. After that, it is usually used when needed during debugging or when you need system tuning.
13. cp (copy) [existing file or directory] [new file or directory] - Command copy files or directories to another files or directories.
14. / (root directory) cd / - go to the root directory.
        Linux file system follows a tree-like hierarchical structure starting at the root. 
        It consists of directories, sub-directories, and data files. This structure follows a standard layout recommended by Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS), which is a standard maintained by the Linux Foundation.
15. sudo su root (superuser do switch user root) -  change user to root user, as root user has all privileges now we have read/write access.
        If we create the file as the root user we can`t change it as a non-root user. We must have root privileges to do that.
16. mkdir (make directory) [new directory name] - command is used to make a new directory. Directories are colored blue.
17. clear - command is used to bring the command line on top of the computer terminal.
18. mv filename .filename - make file hidden.
19. file~  - tildes are generally used to indicate that the file is a backup copy of another file.
20. chmod (change mode) - is the command and system call used to change the access permissions of file system objects sometimes known as modes. 
        Each file and directory has three user based permission groups:
                owner – The Owner permissions apply only the owner of the file or directory, they will not impact the actions of other users.
                group – The Group permissions apply only to the group that has been assigned to the file or directory, they will not effect the actions of other users.
                all users – The All Users permissions apply to all other users on the system, this is the permission group that you want to watch the most.
                u – Owner
                g – Group
                o – Others
                a – All users

        Each file or directory has three basic permission types:
                read – The Read permission refers to a user’s capability to read the contents of the file.
                write – The Write permissions refer to a user’s capability to write or modify a file or directory.
                execute – The Execute permission affects a user’s capability to execute a file or view the contents of a directory.          
                r – Read
                w – Write
                x – Execute

        + (plus) and – (minus); these are used to tell the system whether to add or remove the specific permissions.

        Binary References To Set Permissions
                Read = 4
                Write = 2
                Execute = 1
                No permissions = 0

        Examples.

                chmod a-rw filename - for a – all users – (minus) remove the execute (r – read, w – write) permissions.
                chmod g+x filename - for g – Group users + (plus) add the x (x – Execute) permissions.
                chmod 640 filename - Owner - 6 ( 6 = 4 (Read) + 2 (Write) ),  Group - 4 ( Read = 4 ), Others - 0 (No permissions) - the owner has read and write permissions, the group has read permissions, and all other user have no rights to the file.

21. touch - It is used to create a file without any content. The file created using touch command is empty. This command can be used when the user doesn’t have data to store at the time of file creation.
22. The seven POSIX standard Unix file types are.
        regular,
        directory, 
        symbolic link, 
        FIFO special, 
        block special, 
        character special,
        socket.
23.  The execute bit on a directory allows you to access items that are inside the directory, even if you can not list the directories contents.


                                    Tools 

1. g++ [c++ source file name] - GNU C++ Compiler
2. valgrind [program_name] - Valgrind is a programming tool for memory debugging, memory leak detection, and profiling. 
3. vim [file_name] - Vim is a highly configurable text editor built to make creating and changing any kind of text very efficient.
